Incident response is about preparing and
reacting in case a threat is successfully activated.
Let's remember our home example,
where you left for work and your window was wide open.
You come home and you realize someone's in the house,
you hear rumbling upstairs which means maybe the intruder is likely still there.
What do you do?
Do you leave so you remain safe and then call for help?
Do you go and confront the threat actor?
Do you turn on your remote enabled webcam upstairs,
so you have evidence of what's going on?
There are so many different options and
each one can make or break your ability to save your belongings,
and in drastic cases save your life.
Now how hard would it be to decide on
those things under pressure and in the moment if you
hadn't thought about it before versus if you had
a clearly written plan to follow when you're being robbed,
who to call, where to go for safety,
how to fight back if you have no other option.
The same applies in incident response.
Once, I found myself in a situation where I had to deal with the ransomware incident.
Now, ransomware is an attack method where the hacker essentially encrypts
or locks up your data and then asks you to pay ransom in order for them to unlock it.
Well, on this fateful day,
someone had clicked on a phishing e-mail that included ransomware,
and so it encrypted their machine.
But what you may not realize about ransomware, however,
is that in some cases,
it will also try to encrypt any other connected machines as well.
So it can take down a company's entire network.
In this case, in my experience,
it spread like gossip in high school.
Let's just say a lot of people were locked out of important systems that day.
Thankfully, I was prepared and I had a plan.
By involving the right people at the right time
and also having prepared in advance with backups,
a few hours later,
you wouldn't have known anything happened.
That's the power of incident response.
The truth is, bad things will happen and you have to have a plan in
place before the attack occurs so that you can respond in ways that are most effective.